title
Project 1
Advanced Algorithms

By:
Lucas Taubert	900120-4776
Tim Malmström	910127-2814

Factorization


Abstract
The goal of the problem is to be able to factorize as many numbers as possible
on the test server "Kattis", doing so by implementing efficient factorization
algorithms. Our solution is built on combining 3 different factorization
algorithms together to use the appropriate algorithm for the appropriate
situation. The results that we achieved doing so were to be able to factorize
xx/100 big integers on the test server.

Problem description
The problem given to solve is a problem that has been a mathematical
challenge for a long time. To factorize big integers. What factorizing means
considering integers is to decompose (split) them into as small factors as
possible resulting in a list of factors that together multiply into the given
number. The factorizing of an integer is completed if all factors are
primes(there is no way of factorizing the factors themselves).

The restrictions for the project was that the implementation of the
factorization had to be in either Java, C or C++. As help for solving the
problem there are librarys that contain the basic arithmetics for big integers
in programming.

The problem is evaluated by running the solution on an external server called
Kattis, which tries to factorize 100 numbers within 15 seconds and returns the
result to the sender.


Project progression
This chapter contains the progress of our work and what algorithms and
programming languages we used in our solution. Algorithms metioned in this
chapter will be described in more detail in chapter XXX Algorithms.
	The first thing we did in the creation of our solution was to plan our
first approach to the problem aswell as which result we were going to aim for.
As expressed in many webpages one of the best solutions of the facotrization
problem is the quadratic sieve, which was what we hoped to achieve a
implementation of but since it's known to be difficult to implement we decided
to start by using one of the easier algorithms.
	At first our decision was to implement the solution using C++. We
decided to start by implementing the naive solution to the problem which is by
using trial division. We decided to implement this since it was a good way to
get started working on the project even though we didn't think it would help
in the end. We also tried some improvements to the naive algorithm i.e. by
using trial division from a preconfigured list of primes. As mentioned the
naive solution was not part of our plan for the final solution and we then
continued by trying to implement Fermats Factorization.
	When implementing this more advanced algorithm we encountered a lot of
errors with using C++ since noone in the project group had any previous
knowledge about implementing advanced algorithms in C++, but were planning to
get some training in this with this project. When we realised the complexity
of this problem we then decided to use the programming environment that both
were most comfortable with which is programming Java in the Eclipse IDE. After
switching programming language and environment we continued with the
implementations of Fermats factorizations and also looked a bit on the Pollard
rho algorithm. We implemented both of those getting the Pollard algorithm to
run efficiently and still improving our Fermats solution. Problems we
encountered with the Fermats solution was calculating the square root of a
BigInteger in java. At the same time as we kept improving on the Fermats
algorithm we also started looking at the quadratic sieve since it was our
primary goal in the project. 



Algorithms used
	The algorithms we used during the project were

	Naive trial division
The first algorithm we used was the naive solution of trial division.

Trial division takes the number N to factorize, and then tries for
every number smaller than the square root of N to divide N. If the tested
number proves to be a factor of N it divides N by the given number and saves
said number into a list of factors continuing the algorithm too see if the new
N is divisable by the same number.
	Pseudocode
		trialDivision(N)
		L = empty list;
		for i = 2 to sqrt(N);
			if i divides N
				add i to L;
				N = N/i;
			continue with i;
			else
				next i;

	Naive trial division using a list of primes.
An optimization of the previous algorithm is the trial division using a list
of primes, where instead of trying to divide the number N by all number less
than the square root of N tries to divide N by all primes smaller than the square
root of N. This is better than the previous algorithm since it needs to
perform less divisions for each number N, but since our algorithm got it's
prime values from a preconfigured list of primes it was limited since it had
no way of calculating numbers when it needed more primes.
	We implemented this improvement since we realised that this algorithm
is really fast when searching for small factors, which can be used to improve
the more advanced algorithms that can more efficiently get the bigger factors.					
	
Pollard rho - should probably rewrite this, mostly taken from wikipedia

Pollard rho is a probabilistic algorithm that finds one non trivial factor d in the given
number N and returns that factor. The Pollard rho algorithm is based on the
observation that there are two numbers x and y which are congruent modulo d if
d is a factor of N. The algorithm then uses this assumption to find d by the
condition that d = gcd(|x-y|,N). To find D the function uses a function modulo
n as a generator of a pseudo random sequence, for both x and y.

Fermats Factorization Algorithm


Quadratic sieve




Combinations of algorithms
Since the different algorithms performance is based a lot on the circumstances
i.e. trial division is good for finding small factors while Quadratic sieve is
more optimized on finding the bigger factors, the best overall performance is
to combine the different algorithms and run the one best suited for the
current number being factorized.

Naive trial division combined with the Pollard
This combination proved successful when testing by first using the trial
Division using a list of primes to get some of the smaller factors and then
passing the rest from that algorithm on to the pollard algorithm since it has
a better performance in finding the bigger non trivial factors of a number.

The best combination was a combination of both the trial division, the Pollard
rho algorithm and the quadratic sieve algorithm, since they all have their
different areas of expertise. The trial division calculates the smallest
factors of then number, then the pollard rho algorithm tries to find any "mid
range" factors from the number, after which the quadratic sieve is run trying
to find the last and biggest factors of the number.

Algorithms tried
Fermats factorization - fails on the fact that we don't have any good
implementation on sqrt for BigInteger in java
	
Comparison
We did not send in all of the different algorithms to kattis separately, but we
tried some of them and the results we got were:

trial division using the list of primes: 19/100 numbers factorized in Kattis.
Trial division using the list of primes combined with the Pollard algorithm
for finding the bigger factors: 48/100 numbers factorized in Kattis.
Trial division using the list of primes combined with the Pollard rho
algorithm and the Quadratic sieve algorithm: xxx/100.


Final solution	
The final method that we used for solving the problem was XXXXX since it
achieved the highest score when tested in "Kattis"
	final method used for solving the problem. summarized, more accurately described below.
	

Conclusions


